Peat decomposition – shaping factors, significance in environmental studies and methods of determination; a literature review

Peat decomposition is low during high water table levels, but high during times of low water table levels (Clymo, 1984)
In living peat, the peaty layer with depth of 0.2 – 0.7m, there is lack of oxygen. Therefore, peat decomposition is inhibited, and a peat layer is formed.
The acrotelm is the higher part of the peat layer. The catotelm is the lower part of the peat.
In the acrotelm, different aerobes and fungi transform biomass into humus when it is aerated. Most of the plant biomass is mineralised there to mineral compounds.
Sediments formed in the acrotelm are stored in the catotelm. Humification (a decomposition process) also happens there, humic acids are formed.
Two types of decomposition: primary decomposition is connected with peat forming and secondary decomposition with mire surface drainage, when peat is oxygenated (air can come in). 
The higher the pH, the greater the intensity of decomposition (Grosse-Brauckmann, 1990)
Peat decomposition (or more precisely the humification process) as the degree of disintegration of the organicdsubstances, regardless of the way this disintegration has taken place, and of what substances resulted from it (Von Post, uit Aaby & Berglund, 1986).

Short period of oxygenation releases latch on peat decomposition

Aeration of peat soils lead  to higher peat decomposition rates, compression and physical shrinkage.
Lowest point of the Netherlands is 6.76 m below sea level
secondary decomposition is further decay of previously deposited and stored peat after oxic conditions are present.
CO2 production depends on some factors. One of them is presence of terminal electron acceptor. Oxygen is primary TEA, but also nitrate, manganese, ferric iron and sulphate are used in anoxic conditions, but is less thermodynamically favourable. Supply of the alternative TEA is generally low in peatlands. Once TEAs are depleted, methanogens take over.
Hydrolytic enzymes increase peat degradation rates. Pnenolic compounds inhibt hydrolytic enzyme production. Soil micro organisms can, when they are active, primarily under oxic condtions, extrecte an enzyme (POX) that can degrade phenolic compounds. Thus, under oxic conditions (and a little under anoxic conditions) microbes can increase peat decomposition. That is enzymic latch theory (Freeman 2001).
POX activity is higher with higher pH. Drainage leads to acidification and rewetting leads to higher pH.

The effects of salinization on aerobic and anaerobic decomposition and mineralization in peat meadows: the roles of peat type and land use
If alternative TEAs are present under anaerobic conditions, TEA leads to CH4 production (Rydin and Jeglum, 2006)
Methanogenesis (making CH4) takes place in anaerobic peat soils. This is a slow process. If sulfate is present, CH4 can also be formed, but is faster.

The influence of the aeration status of peat soils on their ability to produce methane
Methanogens are microbes responsible for methane production. They are strictly anaerobic and gain energy for growth by utilizing chemical substrates such as hydrogen, CO2, formate, ethanol, methanol, methylamines and acetates for methane production. 
If oxygen is present, cell membranes, DNA and proteins of methanogens  can be damaged.

Greenhouse gas emission factors associated with rewetting of organic soils

Overall, rewetting organic soils leads to net annual removals of CO2, an increase in annual CH4 emissions, a decrease in N2O and DOC losses and lowering of net GHG emissions.
Emission factors for wet organic soils of CO2-C  in ton C per hectare per year are -0.23 in poor nutrient soils and 0.50 in rich nutrient soils. CH4-C in kg per hectare per year is 92 in poor nutrient and 216 in rich nutrient soils. N2O-N is 0.07 kg N per hectare per year in rewetted soil.
Global warming potential for drained grassland and cropland, grassland nutrient poor and grassland nutrient rich, deeply drained, 30. In rewetted conditions, this is 10. 

Towards developing IPCC methane ‘emission factors’ for peatlands (organic soils)

Drainage of peatlands results in CO2 and N2O emissions
In peatlands, decomposition of organic matter is incomplete and peat accumulates. Microbial decomposition continues under anoxic conditions but such anaerobic degradation of organic material is slow. It is carried out stepwise by a complex food web of specialised micro-organisms, each producing specific intermediate substrates. The final step in anaerobic decomposition is then performed by methanogenic Archaea, i.e. methano producing micro-organisms. The amount of methane emitted to the atmosphere depends on the balance between methane production and consumption and mode of methane transport.
Most methane release from peat columns is derived from recently fixed carbon
methane production decreases when labile substrates are depleted, for example with depth below water table
methane production can be stimulated with addition of intermediate substrates
methane production is lowered by two orders of magnitude under oxic conditions.
PH effects on methane production are inconsistent. 
Some methane is emitted to the atmosphere. The rest is consumed by methanotrophic bacteria. 
Methane can be oxidized, that happens mostly close to the water table, there is the supply of oxygen and methane not limited.
Methane oxidation by methanotrophs are typically an order of magnitude larger than the potential for methane production by mathanogens.
Methane gas is emitted from the peat column to the atmosphere via three pathways: diffusion, ebullition and plant mediated transport. Diffusion has a small contribution
Aerencymous tissue allows oxygen to reach root zone which allows oxidation of methane, at the same time, the tissue allows for methane to move out into the atmosphere. This tissue is present in shunt species. 
Contribution of shunt species to methane effluxes is 25-97%
When the water table rises, the thickness of the methane production zone increases whereas the thickness of the methane oxidation zone decreases and vise versa.
Annual mean water table is good proxy for methane effluxes.
Significant methane effluxes only occur at mean annual water levels above -20cm, for all temperate peatlands and bogs.
Water levels above peat surface often result in reduced methane effluxes because of enhanced methane consumption in the oxygenated water column and lower cover of shunt species.

Greenhouse gas emissions from managed peat soils: is the IPCC reporting guidance realistic?
Organic soils (histosols) can be defined as peat and peaty soils of at least 40 cm within uppermost 100 cm, containing at least 12 % organic carbon (= 20 % organic material) by weight.
Accumulation rates of undrained sites are smal compared to emissions from drained organic (peat) soils.
CO2-C emissions are from grasslands 5.5 tons per hectare per year. N2O-N emissions are 5.8 per hectare per year: emission factors.
From drained peatlands, 40 kg CH4 per hectare per year is emitted. That comes from ditches.
