% This file is about structuring thoughts about doing the last part of the thesis.
% I still need to write about sustainability issues, the conclusion and discussion and the results of the analyses.
% The major obstacle is that I seem to not have enough data to write about sustainability

One option could be to break it up in 2 parts: sustainability of paludiculture versus current intensive dairy farming and on the other hand best sustainable practices of paludiculture, which can be different per situation.

% main question: what sustainability bottlenecks and opportunities need to be accounted for? 
% sub question: what social, economic and ecological bottlenecks and opportunities are there?
% sub question: what spatial and temporal bottlenecks and opportunities are there?

\chapter{issues of sustainability}

\section{Social, Economics and Ecological aspects}

\subsection{Economic factors}
% incomes of farmers versus paludiculture
With intensive dairy farming, the net income of a farmer is 565 euro per year \citep{riet2013}. On average, an intensive dairy farmer receives 400 euros of subsidies from the governments per hectare per year \citep{riet2013}. At the moment, one of the most profitable paludiculture crops is peat moss, with which the net income is calculated as 2.650 euro per hectare per year \citep{riet2013}. However, a first investment of 23.300 euro would be needed \citep{riet2013}. No subsidies are given to paludiculture farmers. Note that land prices of agricultural lands in peatareas are between 50.000 and 60.000 euro per hectare \citep{wur}.

% accounting for other ecosystem services
If ecosystem services costs and benefits would be accounted for, paludiculture would be more economically viable. For example, with a functioning carbon credits system of 35 euro per ton reduced GHG emissions, a peat moss farmer could earn 466.67 euros extera per hectare per year. Moreover, \citet{born} calculated that costs of damage to buildings and infrastructure as a result of peat decline will be in total 1 billion euros till 2050, which would be ~ 30 million euros per year. If other ecosystem services which are presented below would be accounted for, benefits of paludiculture would be higher.

\subsection{Ecological factors}
% Low lying nature conservation
In the Netherlands, a number of nature conservation areas lie in peatlands. These areas often have a higher elevation than their surroundings. That causes seepage from water away from the nature area, resulting in drougths and high costs to keep the water in. Paludiculture as buffers around nature areas are mentioned as a good alternative to prevent seepage from nature areas, and also to function as a bufferzone for aquatic fauna species such as the aquatic warbler \citep{riet2014}. 

% Water storage after extreme weather circumstances
Besides acting as a nature bufferzone, paludiculture areas can be used as water storage bufferzones, in case of extreme rainfall, which is expected to happen more frequently in the future. 

% Nutrient filtering
Surface waters in the Netherlands are often eutrophied due to nutrient runoff after intensive fertilizer and manure application in agricultural fields. In special, N and P are abundently available in surface waters, causing algae and other plants to bloom. As a result, waters can be deprived of oxygen, resulting in a (undesirable) change of aquatic fauna /citep{Waajen2014}. Paludiculture crops have shown to be able to thrive under these high nutrient conditions (see chapter \ref{chap:abiot). Waters can be cleaned by paludiculture crops, which is already done in waste water treatment plants \citep{Ciria2005;Merje2009}. Depending on the nutrient concentrations, wetland species can extract more than 300 kg N and 30 kg P per hectare per year \citep{land2016}. 

% Meadow birds
A topic that deserves special attention is the declining meadow bird populations in the Netherlands. Some of these species, such as the Godwid, has its main habitat in the Netherlands. Therefore, the Netherlands has a special opportunity to protect these species. The main reason for the decline in meadow bird populations in the last decades has been the more intensive harvest of grass on meadows in the Netherlands. However, rewetting of drained peatlands and implementing paludiculture would most probably imply even less space for meadow birds (personal note - Alex Schotman). Moreover, important meadow bird sites are often located in peat meadows, as is depicted on the map. However, note that other biodiversity such as protected sundew, aquatic warbler and orchids can be improved as a result of paludiculture.

\subsection{Social and cultural aspects}
% Cultural landscape
Cows grazing on Dutch meadows is something that many Dutch people familiarize themselves with. Moreover, according to a partitioner at a 'veenmiddag' in the province of Noord-Holland, 'the peat meadows are a special cultural landscape with an openness that has not altered over decades \citep{dosker}. In special, the partitioners wanted to keep the typical ditch structures as it has always been. These ditch structures are known as the "Slagenlandschap". Another attendent, someone who lived in a city mentioned that it is not necessary to maintain the landscap as it is, but more to look at opportunies such as energy landscapes close to home \citep{dosker}. All in all, the attendents agree that peat loss should be stopped and that paludiculture is a welcome alternative, at least in some places \citep{Dosker}

% Farmers openness


\section{spatial and temporal factors}

\subsection{Current system not ready}
The current Dutch use of peatlands is structured around dairy farming, for generations already. Farming of paludiculture would therefore be a major transition for the current land users. Based on participatory observation at a number of conferences, theme days and knowledge expeditions that were performed for this thesis, a few key issues were collected that reflect the current system's unability to start with the transition to paludiculture. 

First of all, paludiculture is not high on the political agenda, yet. Subsidies for paludiculture practices are not in play. Sometimes, regulations in play are opposing paludiculture practices. For example, in Germany, cattail may not be farmed since it is listed as a protected species. 

Secondly, Dutch farmers and agrologists are not convinced about making a transition to paludiculture. There is not enough financial security to make the transition to be a paludiculture farmer. However, paludiculture could be an addition to the current practices farmers perform. The nutrient runoff from their farmyard could be used for paludiculture crops, and paludiculture crops could be an addition to fodder for the cows. 

Thirdly, markets are currently underdeveloped. Paludiculture breeding to obtain the most efficient, the most robust plants is in its infancy. Since large scale production is not taking place, factories are not built and usage of the products is too expensive. 

\subsection{small steps are needed, looking for custom designed local solutions }
Although the current market, politics and farmers are not ready yet for large scale paludiculture implementation, small steps should be taken already to allow for future sustainable paludiculture practices. First of all, better sooner than later, the subsidy system for paludiculture should be updated so that farmers have more financial security. 

Secondly, each location is different, and therefore custom made solutions should be made, depending on the local interests at play. Whether these interests are protection of certain bird species and therefore taking a lower density of cattail products, maintaining the "Slagenlandschap" cultural look of the landscape by farming peat moss instead of cattail, nutrient filtering at farmyards or highly economic production where other social or ecological factors are of less importance.

